# Clinical data

As of v10 IDC now hosts an auxilliary store of clinical data associated with several of its imaging collections in a public BiqQuery data set, 'bigquery-public-data.idc_current_clinical'. There are X tables representing Y different collections. Most of this data was curated from Excel and CSV files available on the Cancer Imaging Archive wiki. For most collections data is placed a single table named  collection_id_clinical, where collection_id is the name of the collection in a standardized format (the idc_webapp_collection_id field in the dicom_all view in the idc_current dataset). Collections from the ACRIN project have clinical data spread across several CSV files. In addition the cptac_clinical table was directly copied from the 'isb-cgc-bq.cptac.clinical_gdc_current' table, which in turn is sourced from the GDC api. cptac_clinical is the only table that contains clinical data from several collections (each collection in the CPTAC program). Each clinical data table also contains two fields we have introduced, dicom_patient_id and source_batch. dicom_patient_id is identical to the PatientID field in the DICOM files that correspond to the given patient. This is inferred from a patient or case column in the original source data. The source_batch field contains an integer that references metadata (see below)indicating which 'batch' of original source records contained the given record. In some of the collection's clinical data, the patient's were seperated into different 'batches' i.e. different source files, or different sheets in the same Excell spreadsheet.  

Most of the clinical tables are understandable as is. Tables from the ACRIN collection are an exception as the field names and some of the field values are coded. We provide two meta data tables, table_metadata and column_metadata that provide information about the structure and provenance of the clinical data in this dataset. table_metadata has table-level metadata about each clinical collection.      
