####2.2 Scope of IDC Instance
*  The IDC Platform is part "Data as a Service" (DaaS) and part "Software as a Service" (SaaS). 
The DaaS aspect consists of data (primarily TCIA data) hosted in Cloud Storage buckets and 
BigQuery datasets. The organization of this data and the process to create these buckets 
and datasets are described below. The SaaS aspect consists of the IDC Web Application 
and the IDC API (Application Programming Interface). All of the code necessary to deploy 
these SaaS elements is stored in GitHub.

* This document describes how to deploy the IDC production system, based on the code base and 
functionality of the system at the date of this document.  In practice, four tiers of 
IDC are regularly maintained: a development tier, a test tier, a user acceptance test (UAT) 
tier, and a production tier. The first two tiers are used for development and testing 
of systems before moving the web application to production.  The UAT tier is used 
for running destructive Appscans against the most recent production code base to 
evaluate the security of our application.  Other parts of the IDC system are deployed 
on individual virtual machines (VMs) on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP), as described 
further below.

* Note that since both GCP project names and GCS bucket names are required to be globally 
unique, an entirely new instance of the IDC platform must use different names than 
what the existing IDC platform uses. In the details below, we will try to clearly indicate 
which names refer to the existing IDC platform, as well as where and how these names 
would need to be changed in a new/different deployment.
