# Original vs Derived objects

We differentiate between the _original_ and _derived_ DICOM objects in the IDC portal and discussions of the IDC-hosted data. By Original objects we mean DICOM objects that are produced by image acquisition equipment - MR, CT or PET images fall into this category. By Derived objects we mean those objects that were generated by means of analysis or annotation of the original objects. Those objects can contains, for example, volumetric segmentations of the structures in the original images, or quantitative measurements of the objects in the image.

{% hint style="warning" %}
The search portal of IDC aimed to group attributes into categories that are specific to the original and derived objects. Due to the time constraints, the current listing of attributes as of IDC MVP does not correspond to the final desired organization, and is expected to change.
{% endhint %}

### Original objects

Most of the images stored on IDC are saved as objects that store individual slices of the image in separate instances of a series, with the image stored in the `PixelData` attribute. 

Open source libraries such as DCMTK, GDCM, ITK, and pydicom can be used to parse such files and load pixel data of the individual slices. Recovering geometry of the individual slices \(spatial location and resolution\) and reconstruction of the individual slices into a volume requires some extra consideration.

{% hint style="danger" %}
It is not safe to sort individual instances using file name, or any attribute other than those that communicate image geometry \(`ImagePositionPatient`, `ImageOrientationPatient`, and `PixelSpacing`\). This may result in accurate geometric ordering of slices!
{% endhint %}

We point this out, because even some prominent examples utilize oversimplified approaches to of recovering image geometry from DICOM files. As an example, this [DICOM data preprocessing tutorial from Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/gzuidhof/full-preprocessing-tutorial) uses `ImagePositionPatient` alone to infer slice spacing. This approach will result in incorrect computed slice spacing for oblique acquisitions \(i.e., see example below\).

![ImagePositionPatient\[2\] for calculating slice spacing for an oblique acquisition leads to incorrect result](../.gitbook/assets/spacing_issue.png)

Although in most cases a DICOM image series will correspond to a single traversal of a 3-d volume, in the general case case it may have multiple slices for the same spatial location \(e.g., for temporally-resolved acquisitions\). It is also, unfortunately, possible that DICOM series, as available to you, will have missing slices and, as a result, inconsistent spacing between slices.

You can use one of the existing tools to reconstruct image volume instead of implementing sorting of the slices on your own:

* dcm2niix
* plastimatch
* ITK readers?

If you want to sort slices on your own, you can see examples of how this can be done in the following places:

* Slicer - Python
* DCMTK - somewhere in util

### Derived objects

In IDC we define "derived" DICOM objects as those that are obtained by analyzing or post-processing the "original" image objects. Examples of derived objects can be annotations of the images to define image regions, or to describe findings about those regions, or voxel-wise parametric maps calculated for the original images.

Although DICOM standard provides a variety of mechanisms that can be used to store specific types of derived objects, most of the image-derived objects currently stored in IDC fall into the following categories:

* voxel segmentations stored as DICOM Segmentation objects \(SEG\)
* segmentations defined as a set of planar regions stored as DICOM Radiotherapy Structure Set objects \(RTSS\)
* quantitative measurements and qualitative evaluations for the regions defined by DICOM Segmentations, those will be stored as a specific type of DICOM Structured Reporting \(SR\) objects that follows DICOM SR template [TID 1500 "Measurements report"](http://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/chtml/part16/chapter_A.html#sect_TID_1500) \(SR-TID1500\)

The type of the object is defined by the object class unique identifier stored in the `SOPClassUID` attribute of each DICOM object. In the IDC Portal we allow the user to define the search filter based on the human-readable name of the class instead of the value of that identifier.

{% hint style="info" %}
You can find detailed descriptions of these objects applied to specific datasets in TICA in the following publications:

* 
{% endhint %}

#### Segmentation objects

DICOM Segmentation object \(SEG\) can be defined by its `SOPClassUID`= .... Unlike most "original" image objects, SEG belongs to the family of _enhanced multiframe_ image objects, which means that it stores all of the frames \(slices\) in a single object. SEG can contain multiple _segments_, segment being a separate label/entity being segmented, with each segment containing one or more frames \(slices\). All of the frames for all of the segments are stored in the `PixelData` attribute of the object. Metadata describing the segments is contained in the `SegmentSequence` of the object.

Typically, it is most expedient to use one of the specialized tools to access the content of SEG. Since the image content of this multi-frame object is often encoded using one bit per pixel representation, and since it can contain multiple segments with potentially spatially overlapping frames, some of the tools that can are commonly used for processing image objects may not be able to parse DICOM SEG correctly. We recommend you use one of the following tools to interpret the content of the DICOM SEG and convert it into alternative representations:

* [dcmqi](https://github.com/QIICR/dcmqi): open source DCMTK-based C++ library and command line converters that aim to help with the conversion between imaging research formats and the standard DICOM representation for image analysis results
* [highdicom](https://github.com/MGHComputationalPathology/highdicom): high-level DICOM abstractions for the Python programming language
* [DCMTK](https://dicom.offis.de/dcmtk.php.en): C++ library that provides API abstractions for reading and writing SEG objects

Tools referenced above can be used to 1\) extract volumetrically reconstructed mask images corresponding to the individual segments stored in DICOM SEG; 2\) extract segment-specific metadata describing its content; 3\) generate standard-compliant DICOM SEG objects from research formats.

{% hint style="info" %}
SEG-specific metadata attributes are available in the table views maintained by IDC. See details [here](../data/organization-of-data.md).
{% endhint %}

#### TID 1500 Structured Reports

DICOM SR uses data elements to encode a higher level abstraction that is a tree of content, where nodes of the tree and their relationships are formalized. SR-TID1500 is one of many standard templates that define constraints on the structure of the tree, and is intended for generic tasks involving image-based measurements. DICOM SR uses standard terminologies and codes to deliver structured content. These codes are used both for defining the concept names and values assigned to those concepts \(name-value pairs\). Measurements include coded concepts corresponding to the quantity being measured, and a numeric value accompanied by coded units. Coded categorical or qualitative values may also be present. In SR-TID1500, measurements are accompanied by additional context that helps interpret and reuse that measurement, such as finding type, location, method and derivation. Measurements computed from segmentations can reference the segmentation defining the region and the image segmented, using unique identifiers of the respective objects.

Open source DCMTK [dsr2html](https://support.dcmtk.org/docs/dsr2html.html) can be used to render the content of the DICOM SR tree in a human-readable form \(you can see one example of such rendering [here](https://peerj.com/articles/2057/#fig-7)\). Reconstructing this content using tools that operate with DICOM content at the level of individual attributes can be tedious. We recommend the tools referenced above that also provide capabilities for reading and writing SR-TID1500 content:

* [dcmqi](https://github.com/QIICR/dcmqi): open source DCMTK-based C++ library and command line converters that aim to help with the conversion between imaging research formats and the standard DICOM representation for image analysis results
* [highdicom](https://github.com/MGHComputationalPathology/highdicom): high-level DICOM abstractions for the Python programming language
* [DCMTK](https://dicom.offis.de/dcmtk.php.en): C++ library that provides API abstractions for reading and writing SR-TID1500 documents

Tools referenced above can be used to 1\) extract qualitative evaluations and quantitative measurements fro the SR-TID1500 document; 2\) generate standard-compliant SR-TID1500 objects.

{% hint style="info" %}
SR-TID1500-specific metadata attributes are available in the table views maintained by IDC. See details [here](../data/organization-of-data.md).
{% endhint %}

